---
layout: single_page
---

{% assign media = site.mindoc_media | where: "page", "source" | sort: "order" %}

# Introduction

**How to Cite:**
> Miller, Caden, Martinez, Lesly. "From Tennnessee to Chicago." Published December 10, 2025. <https://martinez2125.github.io/TennesseeChicago/>

# The Source
### Statement by Alma Hilton Marsells
Our Familv Treasure
This is dedicated to the memory of my beloved husband, William Bernard Marsells, born April 22, 1927 and died February 19, 1991. Bill was such an important part of my life! I cannot imagine what my life would have been without him. Without him, our children and grandchildren would have been non-existent. Bill had a zest for life, but was the most caring person for anyone close to him.

About 1943, our paths first crossed. We were all working at Mars, Inc. (the candy company). There were many teenagers working there during World War II; but there was a small group that developed very close friendships - this consisted of approximately 6 girls and 9 boys -- there was no "pairing off”. Almost every weekend, our gang would plan fun events. Most of the time we went to the beach in the summer and Bill would bring his "medicine ball" (which, as I remember, was a full 3' in diameter when it was blown up - it was like a large beach ball with a tough cover). The girls would bring a picnic lunch, and the boys would bring the soda or Kool Aid, and the air pump. While the girls set up the food, the fellows would blow up the medicine ball; then we would play either Dodge Ball or Keep Away - we had so much fun! For a change, we would sometimes go to a forest preserve for a picnic and a game of softball, or spend the day at the swimming pool at Riis Park in Chicago. We would pick a meeting place, and take the streetcar or bus (sometimes both) to wherever we had decided to go for the day. When it was time to go home, we each went our own way. In the wintertime, it was ice-skating, tobogganing and snowball fights (that ended up with a lot of "face washing").

Bill's friends were so important to him. He was always with the boys. His boyfriends were all interested in girls long before Bill took an interest. Dating girls came about as a necessity so that he could be with his friends. In 1946 they took the stand that if he wanted to continue to go places with them, he had to find a girl as they were taking their girlfriends with them. I used to feel sorry for any girl that would date Bill as he would get on the streetcar or bus, and very seldom check to see that they got on. When Doris Drury asked him to take her to the Trinity High School prom, would you believe, he rented the tux, but loaded his chest down with Ben Gay. She didn't dance too much with Bill, as every time they tried dancing, the odor would really get to her. Through the years, Bill often laughed reminiscing about that night. In his mind, girls weren't for him to date - they were to provide him a chance to be with his friends.

Deen and Bill were in the same Army Air Force unit stationed at Chanute Field. (Deen Holland and Bill were lifelong friends - went into the Army at different times, and Deen was later transferred to the base where Bill was stationed and was under him.) On the 25th, on the train going to Chicago, Bill had asked Deen as to what could they do for the weekend? Deen replied that he was going to spend the time with his steady girlfriend, Mary (not the Mary he married), so that the only way Bill could be with them was if he had a date too. When Bill said he didn't know of any girl that he would want to ask on a date, Deen suggested that he call me. That sounded okay to Bill, as I was not a girl, in his mind, I was one of the "gang". When he called, it just so happened that my date had become sick so I had the night free. Remembering the good times we had had with our gang, we had our first date, May 26, 1946. Needless to say, we had such a good time, that every weekend thereafter we were together, and one month later, June 26th, we were going steady and wearing each other's high school graduation rings. November 23, 1949 we were married.

During the period we were dating, I woke up one morning with a "full-blown" case of German measles (my 4th case). Bill came by the house with my first bouquet of flowers: a dozen gladiolas with a card addressed to "My Polka Dot Queen". I faintly remember the card had a picture of a girl sitting in bed, and he had covered the face with red dots.

Bill was very close to his parents - but especially his mother. From 1945 through June 10th, 1948, when she died, she fought a desperate battle with cancer. She was only about 5' and weighed about 200 lbs. before the cancer was discovered. When she died she didn't even weigh 50 lbs. When Bill got out of the service, he gave his Dad his severance pay; along with all the money he had saved to put towards the mountain of bills his mother's illness had created. Times were very different at that time- individual hospitalization was not available as it is today, and Bill's Dad, even though he was earning a very good wage, was drowning in debt from the medical bills. Bill had not loaned the money to Dad, it was a gift that he did not expect to get back. (That is the kind of guy that Bill was.)

During the days of World War II, many boys dropped out of high school to enlist in the military service, to do their part in "fighting to defend our freedom" - Bill was one of those fellows. He had been going to school at Fenwick High School in Oak Park (a private Catholic college preparatory school) and had had all intentions of going on to college when he graduated from high school. Fenwick changed their policies, and arranged for these "drop outs", while they were in the service, to complete their high school credits through correspondence. Bill completed his requirements and received his high school diploma through the mail.

When Bill was discharged from the Air Corps, he enrolled at the University of Illinois, planning to get his college degree. But, that was one dream that he was not to realize. Bill's mother's health was really deteriorating, and when his Dad could not find anyone to care for Bill's Mom while Dad was at work, Bill dropped out of college and chose to stay home to care for his mother. It was 2 years that Bill devoted to his mother and was proud that he was able to do that for his parents. Bill was always squeamish at the sight of blood, yet God gave him the strength and will power to care for his mother in a manner that he himself never believed that he could. (For many years, after his mother's death, Bill would wake up from a deep sleep, in the middle of night, thinking he heard his mother calling to him for help - for the 1st year of our married life, it was every night.)

Bill's mother was the instigator for our being married. Bill and I had broken up 3 different times because of our religious background. As she was a very strict Polish, Roman Catholic, it surprised Bill, when she always tried to get us back together. It was her fervent desire that we would get married. Her biggest dream was that one day she would get well, and we would be married, and that she would be there to celebrate our wedding. She often told us that she wanted to see us married, and that she wanted us to have a granddaughter for her to play hopscotch or jump rope with. (That is why, when each one of our daughters was born, Bill always looked at me with tears in his eyes and say, "Mom, would have been so very happy!") It was that deep desire that she had, that caused Bill to play his biggest prank on me.

My mother had always been very strict with me. Bill and I were going steady, and mother was not very happy about it. To date Bill, I was really defying Mom. At the time she had not gotten to know Bill - all she knew was that he was Catholic, and that was a big no, no . Mother had a very strict code of ethics of how a girl should act, types of gifts that were acceptable (never anything very personal) and what types of people were dating or marriage material (1st and 2nd generation foreign-born were okay people to talk to or be friendly to, but a different "class" for a daughter to marry).
As Bill and I had finally reached the point where we had decided that we each wanted to spend the rest of our lives together, Bill told me he was going to get me a negligee gown and robe for Christmas; what color would I like? I was horrified, how could I face Mom? I'd probably be thrown out on the street. The more I worried about it, the more Bill talked about the gift. He decided it had to be a black one. For several weeks, that was all I heard. No matter how hard I tried, I could not get Bill to give up this notion.

Christmas Eve came and I was over at the Marsells' home. Dad and Ron were sitting in separate chairs across the room, and Bill was sitting by his Mom. She was stretched out on the couch in a makeshift bed, and the presents were passed out. She had wanted me to sit near her so that she could watch me open my gifts. I sat on the floor by her, hoping against hope that Bill did not get me the dreaded gift. That awful moment came, and Bill's mother passed down the box - it was a dress box. I wanted the floor to open up and swallow me. There was Ron, Bill, his Dad and Mom, all watching me - I put off opening the box as long as I could -all other gifts had been opened, and I'm still sitting there with the wrapped dress box. Try as I could, I could not find a way to escape this moment. Bill's Mom was badgering me to open the box. I handled the box as though it contained a sensitive bomb that would explode at any moment. I gritted my teeth and proceeded to unwrap it. There, the paper was off - I shook the box for any noise, hoping there would be one, and then I could open the box knowing it was not that dreaded negligee. The box lid is off, but there's the tissue with a seal holding it shut. Bill's Mom is anxious and saying, "Bunny, don't be so slow, I want to see what Billy got you".

What will their thoughts be when I reveal the dreaded negligee? But, wait, the tissue is laying funny. I touched the paper near the corner of the box, and there didn't seem to be anything under it - yet the center still stayed as high as it was when I removed the lid. Could it be possible that it was something else?

Now, it didn't seem to be so bad to remove the tissue. There in the center of the dress box, was another gift that was taped there. It was much smaller - what could it be? I excitedly picked up that package and unwrapped it -it's a ring box! There, inside was a special engagement ring. It was so very special as Bill had given all his money to his Dad, and then got a job at St. Celestine's school (across the street from his home) as an assistant janitor and he had been working nights after his Dad got home, in order to earn money to buy me this ring. His mother was so proud! Bill's eyes were brimming with tears of pride and happiness. I will always cherish that moment. No engagement ring ever had the love and effort put into it as that one did.

It was not a very romantic way to receive an engagement ring, but both Bill and I shed many tears of joy knowing how happy it had made Bill's mother to share that moment with us. We (Bill and I) both knew that his mother would not be able to live to see us married and to see us engaged and planning our marriage, was the next best thing for her. Bill's Dad was overjoyed at seeing how happy Bill's mother was - it was a very bright silvery lining in a dark gloomy cloud that hung over their lives for almost 3 years.

Bill's whole life centered on his family, caring and providing for them. His happiness depended so completely on seeing that everyone else was happy. He had immense pride in his loved ones and doing everything possible for them. He treasured every one of his family members; but, in reality, he, was the treasure of our family!

Alma Hilton Marsells, February 14, 2005

# About this Source
The act of creating a homemade family archive is by no means a new process. Historically, many families have taken their own approaches to preserving and documenting their family history. Although no two family archives are exactly the same, certain patterns do exist across the history of their creation. Most family archives are based heavily on “home sources”, or documents that have originally been created and kept by the family[^1]. The most common home sources that are included in family archives are photographs and both written and typed statements[^2] [^3] [^4]. The statement becomes a particularly interesting part of the family archive to observe, as in an attempt to create a more extensive documentation of family lineage, many family archivists utilize the “family group record”, or another form of a similar content and structure. This specific record takes note of major genealogical information–parents and their children, births, and deaths[^5]. The presence of this form (although varied) across multiple family archives illustrates what seems to be considered the core of a family’s history. Other common trends in family archives include the presence of public records, such as death certificates, marriage certificates, gravestones, and newspapers[^6] [^7]. These specific records are some of the more readily accessible records to the public, and the important genealogical information they contain seem to be the main reason for their presence across family archives.  

Aside from the value family archives hold as means of preserving a family’s history, they hold value in the historic information they contain through simply the act of recording a family’s story. With the use of family archives, historians are able to glean into the lives of ordinary people during major historic periods, and gain a richer understanding of historic life[^8]. Family archives can also illuminate human patterns in history, such as migration and demographics[^9], with the human nature of family archives ensuring historians consider the human nature of history itself.

This edition aims to provide deeper insight into the family archive of one specific family, the Hilton’s. The structure of this specific family archive seems to follow in the footsteps and trends of other American family archives created between the 19th and 20th centuries. Many of the pages within a family binder this archive includes are made up entirely of photographs, and much of the more detailed parts of this family’s history are recorded in typed statements created by the family archivist. When viewing this source through the lens of what historians can understand from it, a few key histories the Hilton family archive contains includes the urban development (demographic, neighborhood, industry) in the 20th century, life during the Great Depression, and the life of migrant families in the US.


The members of the Hilton and subsequently Marsells families have in many ways refined the methods and practices which help to enable this bridging of inter-generational gaps. Through series of carefully assembled and thoughtfully arranged biographical documents, photographs, and recorded stories of everyday life, one feels like these individuals included within these pages can be accessed directly, as real people who lead real and complex lives, rather than them be relegated to almost a “data marker”; a name with a set of dates. We can largely thank the work of Alma Elizabeth Hilton Marsells and her brother, Richard Allen Hilton, for enabling this ability in the set of documents presented as a part of this edition, as for without the methods of storytelling and preservation, both physically and otherwise, that they have laid out within these sources, a seamless and thorough study of the history of the Hilton family in Chicago and in modern memory more broadly would not be possible/exist. This edition is dedicated to them both, their forebears, their descendants, and anyone who is fortunate enough to consider them as “kin”.

The Hilton family can conclusively trace back their American origins to the latter half of the 17th century, when they settled in lands located in St. Mary’s County, Maryland, before eventually making their way to North Carolina, where they congregated until making a move westward in the years following the American Revolution to the mountainous region along the North Fork of the Holston River in the area which would become the unincorporated community of Hiltons in Scott County, Virginia. The parents of both Alma and Richard Hilton, Almer Eric Hilton (1901-1952) and Effie Malinda Hilton, née Sims (1902-1979, both grew up on the farms and rolling hills of Scott County, but both had the desire shared by so many of their fellow “bright young things” of the period to go make names for themselves and to earn wages which could support better lives for themselves and their family. This is why in the early 1920s they both set off for the “big city”, which for them was Detroit. Effie, who was a bookkeeper, stayed with her brothers in Detroit, and soon met up with and started going with her distant cousin, Almer, whom she saw as a familiar face from home amongst the hustle and bustle of the unfamiliar “Motor City”. The two were married in June of 1926 and moved back home to Virginia, eventually settling in Kingsport, Tennessee, which is where their daughter Alma (1927-2013) was born. 
   
Almer soon took up a job as a salesman with Sterchi Bros. furniture store in Kingsport, where his strong knowledge of electronics became apparent through his efforts selling radios in the showroom, and soon he was offered a temporary job with the Grigsby-Grunow Company out of Chicago, owners and manufacturers of the prestigious Majestic line of radio equipment. That is until the stock market crashed. He naturally lost his position, and soon thereafter lost the house in Kingsport.. Luckily, after a short while, he was able to get a position with the Chicago & Northwestern Railroad, perhaps due to connections that he had made in assisting with the installation of radio equipment on C&NW parlor cars during his time with Majestic, and was tasked with working in the Homan Avenue Yards on the Near West Side, where he notably helped in the outfitting and maintenance of President Roosevelt’s private railcar which had custom handrails fitted throughout to act as an aid to the advanced effect that Polio had on his mobility. He also was tasked with controlling all automatic train stops on all C&NW streamliners up until the time of his death, including the prestigious “400” which ran complete service from Chicago to the Twin Cities up in Minnesota. 

Upon his sudden and tragic death in 1952, Effie  was now the sole breadwinner, and took up a job with Blue Cross Insurance, a position she held until retirement, at which she began volunteering at Shriner’s Hospital in Chicago. Alma would go on to attend Steinmetz High School and be employed by Mars, the massive candy manufacturers located at Oak Park & Armitage Avenues, which is where she met the man who would eventually become her husband, William Bernard Marsells (1927-1991). The couple would end up having seven daughters together and Bill would find a career in shipping and traffic management for Brach Candy, Helene Curtis, American Motors, Allied Shipping, and others. Almer & Effie’s son, Richard Allen Hilton (b. 1936), attended Lane Technical High School and Elmhurst College, before going back to school later in his career to get degrees in education from Northern Illinois University. He would marry Miss Nancy Holtz (b. 1939?) and three daughters would be born as a result of this union. Both Richard and Nancy are alive and well, retired, and spending their time on pastimes of lake management and wildlife rehabilitation respectively in Wonder Lake, Illinois[^10].

# About this Edition
The authors of this edition have formatted, organized, and edited the materials included within in a manner which is both intended to convey and represent the original style, nature, and physical characteristics of said materials as they are presented in their original form, while also making efforts to increase the usability and accessibility of the works through the implementation of a streamlined and comprehensive format throughout. Special attention has been given to both preserving unique qualities of the primary sources—such as photographic arrangements, irregular templating, and original sequencing—as well as the cleaning up of certain spelling, punctuational, and formatting errors if deemed as potentially inhibiting the legibility or clarity/flow of the texts while not detracting from the integrity or “personality” of said original works. It should be noted by the reader that the contents of this multimedia edition (photographs, letters, genealogical ID pages, scrapbook/album components, & digitally typed and scanned transcriptions) are included together here as a grouping both due to the fact that they are contained in one singular assembled binder, as well as their similar and related subject matter. Typed transcriptions were edited and formatted with the help of both Google Docs and Adobe Acrobat. Careful review was conducted to ensure that digital transcriptions created for this edition did not stray from or alter the original characteristics and integrity of the typed documents.

Furthermore, it should be made clear that the collection of documents and sources included and presented here as part of this edition make up just a limited portion of extant components of this genealogical archive amassed by the Hilton and Marsells families and their subsequent branches, and have been selected both due to their value in representing a wide scope of the greater collection, as well as the nature in which this small assemblage of articles has been compiled, allowing it to be used as a tool to help indicate both the methods utilized in this particular period of family recordkeeping and the individuals who took part in it. With this in mind, make note that additional information from said greater archive may be conveyed through the use of supplementary footnotes to aid in context. Finally, it should be made clear that judgements of the parameters and extent of this edition were ultimately left to be decided upon by its authors, and are derived from said authors’ most neutral and objective considerations on the basis of preservation, clarity, and consistency.

# Supplements

# Bibliography
Aaron, L. 1992. “Using Genealogy to Teach History.” OAH Magazine of History 6 (3): 5–7. 
> https://doi.org/10.1093/maghis/6.3.5.

Family Papers of Alma Hilton Marsells, Collection of the Author (Caden J. Miller), Champaign, IL.

Evans, Tanya. 2011. “Secrets and Lies: The Radical Potential of Family History.” History Workshop Journal 71 (71): 49
> –73. https://www.jstor.org/stable/41306811.


Hilton, James L. 1998. Hiltons of Scott County, Virginia.

Hilton. "Our Families" (Binder) 

Lichtman, Allan J. 1978. Your Family History. Vintage.

Linder, Billy Royce. 1978. How to Trace Your Family History. New York : Everest House. 


Mamie Mackie (New York Mills, MN) Family History. 1940-1981. Available through: Adam Matthew, Marlborough, 
> Migration to New Worlds, http://www.migration.amdigital.co.uk.proxy2.library.illinois.edu/Documents/Details/IHRCA_1560_04_mackie. 

Mattinen, Bernice Juntunen. 1982-1983. Juntunen-Mattinen Family History [Folder 1]. Available through: Adam 
> Matthew, Marlborough, Migration to New Worlds, http://www.migration.amdigital.co.uk.proxy2.library.illinois.edu/Documents/Details/IHRCA_1560_02_juntunen-mattinen_01. 

Rhoads, James B. 1979. “The Importance of Family History to Our Society.” The Public Historian 1 (3): 6–16. 
> https://doi.org/10.2307/3377529.

# Credits and Acknowledgments

# Optional: Author Biography

# About MinDoc 1.0
> This site was built using MinDoc 1.0, a prototype digital documentary edition template developed for classroom use by members of [SourceLab](https://sourcelab.history.illinois.edu/) at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign.  The original project team included Liza Senatrova, John Randolph, Caroline Kness, and Richard Young.

# References

[^1]: Linder, *How to Trace Your Family History*, pg. 20
[^2]: Hilton
[^3]: Mamie Mackie Family
[^4]: Mantinen, *Juntunen-Mattinen Family*
[^5]: Linden, *How to Trace Your Family History*, pg. 125
[^6]: Hilton
[^7]: Mantinen, *Juntunen-Mattinen Family*
[^8]: Rhoads, *The Importance of Family History*, pg. 3
[^9]: Rhoads, *The Importance of Family History*, pg. 8
[^10]: Family Papers of Alma Hilton Marsells, Collection of the Author, Champaign, IL.

